Computer science is the scientific and practical approach to computation and its applications. It is the systematic study of the feasibility, structure, expression, and mechanization of the methodical procedures (or algorithms) that underlie the acquisition, representation, processing, storage, communication of, and access to information. An alternate, more succinct definition of computer science is the study of automating algorithmic processes that scale. A computer scientist specializes in the theory of computation and the design of computational systems.

Its fields can be divided into a variety of theoretical and practical disciplines. Some fields, such as computational complexity theory (which explores the fundamental properties of computational and intractable problems), are highly abstract, while fields such as computer graphics emphasize real-world visual applications. Still other fields focus on challenges in implementing computation. For example, programming language theory considers various approaches to the description of computation, while the study of computer programming itself investigates various aspects of the use of programming language and complex systems. Human–computer interaction considers the challenges in making computers and computations useful, usable, and universally accessible to humans.

The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since antiquity, aiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Further, algorithms for performing computations have existed since antiquity, even before the development of sophisticated computing equipment. The ancient Sanskrit treatise Shulba Sutras, or "Rules of the Chord", is a book of algorithms written in 800 BC for constructing geometric objects like altars using a peg and chord, an early precursor of the modern field of computational geometry.

Blaise Pascal designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator,
Pascal's calculator, in 1642. In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital
mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.He may be considered the
first computer scientist and information theorist, for, among other reasons,
documenting the binary number system. In 1820, Thomas de Colmar launched the
mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he released his simplified
arithmometer, which was the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable
enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the
design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in
1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical
calculator, his Analytical Engine. He started developing this machine in 1834
and "in less than two years he had sketched out many of the salient features of
the modern computer". "A crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system
derived from the Jacquard loom" making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In
1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada
Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute
the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first computer
program. Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched
cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of
IBM. In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken
convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card equipment and was also
in the calculator business to develop his giant programmable calculator, the
ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used
cards and a central computing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed
it as "Babbage's dream come true".

During the 1940s, as new and more powerful computing machines were developed,
the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human
predecessors. As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just
mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study
computation in general. Computer science began to be established as a distinct
academic discipline in the 1950s and early 1960s. The world's first
computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science,
began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first
computer science degree program in the United States was formed at Purdue
University in 1962. Since practical computers became available, many
applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own
rights.

Modern society has seen a significant shift in the users of computer technology,
from usage only by experts and professionals, to a near-ubiquitous user
base. Initially, computers were quite costly, and some degree of human aid was
needed for efficient use—in part from professional computer operators. As
computer adoption became more widespread and affordable, less human assistance
was needed for common usage.
